Engineering Review: Online Schema Migration for Orders Table

Background

The orders service needs a new `normalized_customer_key` column used by fraud and reconciliation workflows. The table contains approximately 2.4 billion rows and receives continuous writes. A blocking table rewrite or long exclusive lock is unacceptable.

Current Table

orders(
    order_id bigint primary key,
    customer_id text not null,
    region_code text not null,
    status smallint not null,
    created_at timestamptz not null,
    updated_at timestamptz not null,
    ...
)

Target behavior requires a deterministic normalized key derived from region_code and customer_id. New application code must eventually enforce non-null values for all newly created orders and support an index used by lookup queries.

Migration Constraints

- no planned application outage;
- lock acquisition must remain below 500 ms;
- replication lag must remain below operational threshold;
- backfill must be resumable;
- rollback must not require deleting already populated data;
- mixed-version application fleets must remain compatible during deployment.

Rejected Approach: Add Column with Immediate Default and NOT NULL

Although modern database versions may optimize some constant defaults, the normalized value is row-dependent and cannot be expressed as a single metadata-only constant. Computing every value in one DDL statement would create unacceptable I/O and lock risk.

Accepted Phased Strategy

Phase 1: Add Nullable Column

ALTER TABLE orders
ADD COLUMN normalized_customer_key text;

This is a metadata change on the target database version. The migration job will set a short lock timeout. If the lock cannot be acquired quickly because of conflicting transactions, it will abort and retry rather than waiting indefinitely.

Phase 2: Dual-Write in Application

A backward-compatible application release computes the key for every insert and for updates that modify customer_id or region_code. Existing code can ignore the new column.

The normalized function is versioned in application code and covered by deterministic test vectors. The same normalization logic is also implemented in the backfill job using a shared library to avoid semantic drift.

Phase 3: Backfill Existing Rows

Backfill is chunked by primary-key range. Each transaction updates a bounded number of rows:

UPDATE orders
SET normalized_customer_key = normalize(region_code, customer_id)
WHERE order_id > :low
  AND order_id <= :high
  AND normalized_customer_key IS NULL;

The job records completed ranges in a control table. Range completion is idempotent because rows already populated are skipped.

Chunk size is dynamically reduced when:
- replica lag rises;
- transaction duration exceeds target;
- storage write latency rises;
- vacuum or checkpoint pressure becomes elevated.

The backfill sleeps between chunks under sustained load.

Why Primary-Key Ranges

OFFSET pagination becomes increasingly expensive on a multi-billion-row table and can behave poorly under concurrent writes. Stable primary-key ranges provide deterministic progress and bounded scans.

Rows inserted after the backfill begins are populated by dual-write application code, so the backfill does not need to chase the moving high-water mark indefinitely.

Phase 4: Verify Completeness

Verification has several layers.

Exact null count query may be expensive at this scale, so operational checks first sample ranges and use incremental counters. Before constraint validation, an indexed or controlled full scan verifies:

SELECT count(*)
FROM orders
WHERE normalized_customer_key IS NULL;

The result must be zero.

A semantic checksum job samples rows and recomputes the normalization independently. Completeness alone is insufficient if the value is wrong.

Phase 5: Build Index Concurrently

Create the lookup index using the database's online/concurrent index-build mechanism:

CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY idx_orders_normalized_customer_key
ON orders(normalized_customer_key);

The operation is monitored for:
- long-running snapshots that prevent cleanup;
- replication lag;
- failed/invalid index state;
- disk headroom.

If a concurrent build fails, the invalid index object is removed before retry.

Phase 6: Add Constraint Without Long Blocking Validation

Where supported, add a check constraint in a non-validating mode:

ALTER TABLE orders
ADD CONSTRAINT orders_normalized_key_present
CHECK (normalized_customer_key IS NOT NULL)
NOT VALID;

New or modified rows are checked immediately, while historical rows are not scanned under the DDL lock.

Then validate separately:

ALTER TABLE orders
VALIDATE CONSTRAINT orders_normalized_key_present;

Validation scans existing rows but avoids the stronger table lock associated with some direct NOT NULL conversions.

After successful validation, the database-specific procedure may convert the column to formal NOT NULL if this can be done using the validated proof without a full blocking scan. The exact command must be tested against the production database version.

Deployment Ordering

1. Database adds nullable column.
2. Application version N starts dual-writing but reads do not depend on column.
3. Backfill runs to completion.
4. Semantic verification passes.
5. Concurrent index build completes.
6. Constraint validation completes.
7. Application version N+1 may read using the new key.
8. Old application version is removed from fleet.
9. Optional cleanup removes transitional code.

This ordering allows version N and N+1 to coexist.

Rollback Analysis

Before phase 7, rollback is simple: revert application behavior and stop backfill. The extra column and values may remain harmlessly.

After clients depend on the column or index, rollback must preserve the schema even if application behavior is reverted. We explicitly do not couple application rollback to destructive schema rollback.

Normalization Function Changes

A critical review question is what happens if normalization rules change during the multi-day backfill. The rule therefore carries a `normalization_version`. The migration freezes version 1 for this column. A later algorithm change must use a new migration or explicit recomputation, not silently change the backfill code midway.

Concurrency

The update predicate includes `normalized_customer_key IS NULL`. If a live application writes a value before the backfill reaches the row, the backfill does not overwrite it.

If customer_id changes concurrently, application dual-write updates both fields in the same transaction. Backfill ranges should use normal row locking and rely on transaction serialization to avoid partial states.

Observability

Dashboard metrics:
- rows_backfilled_total;
- ranges_completed;
- current_range_width;
- update_transaction_seconds;
- rows_per_second;
- replica_lag_seconds;
- deadlocks/retries;
- null_estimate;
- index_build_phase;
- storage write latency.

Stop Conditions

The job pauses automatically if:
- replica lag exceeds 60 seconds for more than 2 minutes;
- database CPU exceeds 85% for sustained period;
- lock wait exceeds 500 ms;
- disk free space falls below reserve;
- deadlock rate crosses threshold.

Review Outcome

Approved with conditions:
- benchmark DDL locking behavior on exact production version;
- freeze normalization version before phase 2;
- prove index disk headroom;
- exercise failed concurrent index-build cleanup;
- test rollback with mixed application versions.

The migration is considered an application/database protocol, not a one-time SQL script. Safety comes from compatibility between phases and the ability to pause between them.
